# 2022-11-10 Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO)

[Note: I wrote this before checking to see whether this risk is new to FICO. As it turns out: no, it's not new; it's at least a decade old. What I now find interesting, after having written it, is wondering how organizations should describe "latent risks," or risks that seem to just hang out there unresolved...]

Today's risk factor comes from the [10-K of Fair Isaac Corporation ("FICO")](https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/814547/000081454722000016/fico-20220930.htm), a Montana-based corporation. Most notably, FICO is the company behind the FICO Score, which is used in a significant number of consumer lending transactions. As FICO describes it:

> The FICO® Score is a three-digit number ranging from 300-850. Our proprietary analytic algorithms are applied to credit data collected and maintained by the three U.S. national consumer reporting agencies — Experian, TransUnion and Equifax — to produce standard scores that are used across the credit lifecycle, including in origination, account management and consumer marketing. Users of our scores generally pay the consumer reporting agencies a fee for each individual score generated by our algorithms, and the consumer reporting agencies pay an associated fee to us. Except for product development using de-personalized data, FICO does not collect or store the consumer credit data used in the calculation of our scores, and in most cases, we do not sell our scores directly to lenders or other end-users.

Notable in this description is the fact that the *data* comes from the three major consumer reporting agencies and, when FICO sells to customers, they share revenue with those reporting agencies. But, what if the reporting agencies tried to sell directly to those customers and cut FICO out of the equation? That's today's risk factor: 

> ** We rely on relationships with third parties for marketing, distribution and certain services. If we experience difficulties in these relationships, including competition from these third parties, our future revenues may be adversely affected.**

> Many of our products are sold by distributors or partners, and we intend to continue to market and distribute our products through these existing and future distributor and partner relationships. Our Scores segment relies on, among others, Experian, TransUnion and Equifax. Failure of our existing and future distributors to generate significant revenues or otherwise perform their expected services or functions, demands by such distributors to change the terms on which they offer our products, or our failure to establish additional distribution or sales and marketing alliances, could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition. In addition, certain of our distributors presently compete with us and may compete with us in the future, either by developing competitive products themselves or by distributing competitive offerings. For example, Experian, TransUnion and Equifax have developed a credit scoring product to compete directly with our products and are actively selling the product. Competition from distributors or other sales and marketing partners could significantly harm sales of our products and services.

To counter this risk, FICO appears to be taking three approaches: (1) reinforce the market position of the FICO score as "the standard"; (2) move higher up the value chain in its product offerings; and (3) reduce its dependence on the reporting agencies for the data itself. Here's how FICO describes its strategy:  

> In fiscal 2022, our B2B scoring solutions, including the flagship FICO® Score, continued to be the standard measure of consumer credit risk in the U.S. We continued to promote adoption of our most predictive scores, FICO® Score 10 and 10T. We also continued our rollout of the FICO® Resilience Index, a complement to FICO Scores that identifies consumers who are more resilient to economic stress relative to other consumers within the same FICO Score bands. We continued to develop scores that use alternative data to enhance conventional credit bureau data and generate scores for otherwise un-scorable consumers.

