
Today's risk review comes from the manufacturing industry and presents an example of how a strategic choice can present cascading opportunities and challenges. 

[SemiLEDs Corp](https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/1333822/000095017022022841/leds-20220831.htm#item_1a_risk_factors) is a Taiwan-based business that "develop[s], manufacture[s] and sell[s] light emitting diode (LED) chips and LED components, LED modules and systems." Its "products are used for general lighting and specialty industrial applications, including ultraviolet, or UV, curing of polymers, LED light therapy in medical/cosmetic applications, counterfeit detection, germicidal and viricidal devices LED lighting for horticulture applications, architectural lighting and entertainment lighting." 

Along with the usual risks that would apply to a manufacturer (e.g., COVID, supply chains, inflation, etc.), today's risk reflects the choice of SemiLEDs to try and avoid price commoditization with LEDs generally and instead move into a specific emerging market, "Ultraviolet LEDs":

> ** If LEDs fail to achieve widespread adoption in the UV lighting market, or if alternative technologies gain market acceptance, our prospects will be materially and adversely impacted and we may be unable to achieve and maintain our profitability.**
> SemiLEDs had moved away from general lighting markets due to extreme price erosion led by companies in China. We have moved on to focus on industrial UV applications. If UVLED does not achieve widespread acceptance and adoption, or if demand for UVLED products does not grow as we anticipate, our revenues may decline and our prospects for growth and profitability will be limited. Moreover, if existing sources of light other than LED devices, such as mercury lamp, remain popular, or if new sources of light are developed, our current products and technologies could become less competitive or obsolete.
> Potential customers for UVLED systems may not adopt UVLED as an alternative to mercury lamp technology because of UVLEDs' higher upfront cost. In addition, manufacturers of mercury lamp systems may have substantial investments and know-how related to their existing technologies, and may perceive risks relating to the complexity, reliability, quality, usefulness and cost-effectiveness of UVLED products. Even if UVLED continues to achieve performance improvements and cost reductions, limited customer awareness of the benefits of UVLEDs, lack of widely accepted standards governing UVLED systems, and customer unwillingness to adopt UVLEDs in favor of entrenched solutions could significantly limit the demand for UVLED products. Additional factors that may limit the adoption of UVLEDs for mercury lamps include, among others:
> * a significant reduction in or discontinuation of government regulations and economic incentives to promote the development of the UVLED industry or government regulations that discourage the use of  mercury;
> * changes in economic and market conditions that affect the use of mercury, for example declining environmental awareness of the damage caused by mercury; and 
> * capital expenditures for new and replacement systems by end-users of UVLED products, which may decline during economic downturns.

In other words, SemiLEDs is worried that potential customers will stick to mercury lamps and not spend the necessary capital to switch to UVLEDs. Notably, SemiLEDs also reports that it is heavily dependent on a small number of customers, including Revlon, Inc., which is currently in bankruptcy proceedings.[^1] In other words, this is fundamentally a marketing and sales play: they need to be looking at customer "adoption" or "takeup" metrics. What I also find interesting though, is the second-order strategic question about whether SemiLEDs is planning to use UVLEDs to diversify its customer base or whether it is going to focus on securing major commitments from its largest customers.

***

[1] "For the years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021, our top ten customers collectively accounted for 88\% and 82\%, respectively, of our revenues. Some of our largest customers and what we produce, or have produced, for them have changed from quarter to quarter primarily as a result of the timing of discrete, large project-based purchases and broadening customer base, among other things. For the years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021, sales to our three largest customers, in the aggregate, accounted for 59\% and 52\% of our revenues, respectively. For the year ended August 31, 2022, sales to Revlon, Inc. and INDEL Distribution B.V. accounted for 28\% and 18\% of our total revenues, respectively. For the year ended August 31, 2021, sales to Revlon, Inc. and INDEL Distribution  B.V. accounted for 15\% and 27\% of our total revenues, respectively. In the same periods, Cepton Inc., an U.S. company focusing on LiDAR products, is a top ten customer."